# The Holographic Brain: A New Perspective on Consciousness as a Multidimensional Projection

<p style='text-align: left;'>Fernando B. Avila-Rencoret, MD</p>
<p style='text-align: left;'>Hamlyn Centre for Medical Robotics</p>
<p style='text-align: left;'>Imperial College London, United Kingdom</p>
<p style='text-align: left;'>fba13ATic.ac.uk, favilarATgmail.com</p>


## Abstract
The Rencoret-GPT-Claude (RGC) Tensor Hypothesis proposes a framework for understanding consciousness as a result of hierarchical information integration in the brain into higher-dimensional spaces, represented using tensor products. Drawing on principles of nonlinear dynamics, adaptive optics, and graph theory, this preprint presents the early key ideas and theoretical underpinnings of the RGC hypothesis, as well as a review of relevant empirical evidence from neuroimaging, neurophenomenology, and computational modelling. In particular, I highlight the contributions of Francisco Varela and discuss the potential implications of this approach for understanding the neural basis of consciousness and its alterations in states such as sleep, anaesthesia, and neurological disorders. 

# Introduction

Consciousness remains one of the most challenging and enigmatic
phenomena in science, with many theories attempting to explain how
subjective experience arises from the physical brain. The RGC Tensor
Hypothesis is an ambitious approach that aims to reconcile different
perspectives by proposing that consciousness results from hierarchical
integration of information in the brain into higher-dimensional spaces.
This hypothesis is grounded in the ideas of Francisco Varela\[1\], who
emphasised the importance of understanding the brain’s dynamics and
self-organisation as key factors in the emergence of consciousness.

In this preprint, I will summarise the key ideas of the RGC Tensor
Hypothesis, discuss its theoretical foundations, and review the
corresponding evidence from neuroscience, phenomenology, and
computational modelling. I will also explore the implications of this
framework for understanding the neural basis of consciousness and its
alterations in various states and conditions.

# The RGC Tensor Hypothesis and Information Integration

The RGC Tensor Hypothesis proposes that consciousness arises from
hierarchical integration of information in the brain, which can be
represented using a tensor product framework\[2\]. In this framework,
each level of consciousness emerges from interactions between lower
levels, corresponding to transitions into higher-dimensional spaces of
experience. The capacity for each level of experience depends on the
connectivity, synchrony, and dynamics that integrate information from
the preceding level into a higher-dimensional space of cognition and
awareness\[3\]. This hypothesis is supported by evidence from
neuroimaging studies showing that conscious perception and awareness are
associated with widespread integration of information across specialised
networks in the brain\[4\]. Moreover, computational models of neural
dynamics have demonstrated that transitions between different levels of
information integration can be achieved through changes in connectivity,
synchrony, and criticality\[5\].

# Nonlinear Dynamics and Adaptive Optics in the RGC Hypothesis

The RGC hypothesis draws on principles of nonlinear dynamics and
adaptive optics to explain how the brain can develop and sustain
higher-dimensional, coherent states of consciousness. These principles
include synchronisation, self-organisation, adaptive feedback, and
criticality\[6\].

Synchronisation refers to the interactions between oscillating neural
populations that can generate synchronised states of increasing
coherence/dimensionality, corresponding to transitions between levels of
consciousness\[7\]. Self-organisation describes the interplay of
excitation and inhibition that enables cortical dynamics to form high
coherence states\[8\]. Adaptive feedback involves wavefront sensing,
control, and correction from adaptive optics to model how the brain
detects and compensates for perturbations that would otherwise reduce
coherence and conscious awareness\[9\]. Criticality represents the
optimal point between order and chaos, where the system achieves maximum
complexity, dynamic range, and computational ability, which corresponds
to higher-dimensional, coherent states integrating information in the
RGC hypothesis\[10\].

# Graph Theory and the RGC Hypothesis

Graph theory provides a powerful mathematical framework for studying the
brain’s large-scale organisation and its relationship to
consciousness\[11\]. By representing the brain as a network of
interconnected nodes and edges, graph theory allows researchers to
quantify global and local measures of connectivity, integration, and
segregation, which can be related to the different levels of information
integration proposed in the RGC Tensor Hypothesis\[12\].

Empirical studies using graph theory have shown that the brain’s
topology is characterised by small-world properties, which support
efficient information transfer and integration between specialised
modules\[13\]. Furthermore, alterations in graph-theoretic measures have
been observed in various states of consciousness, such as sleep,
anaesthesia, and neurological disorders, which are consistent with the
RGC hypothesis’ predictions regarding changes in information integration
and progression to higher/lower-dimensional spaces\[14\].

# Empirical Evidence: Neuroimaging, Neurophenomenology, and Computational Modelling

Neuroimaging studies, particularly those employing functional
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), have provided valuable insights into
the neural correlates of consciousness and its relationship with
information integration. For example, research by Leff et al. (2011)
demonstrated that changes in connectivity and information integration
could be observed in surgeons performing surgical tasks under fNIRS
sensing\[15\].

Neurophenomenological studies, following the tradition of Francisco
Varela, have attempted to bridge the gap between first-person subjective
experience and third-person neuroscientific observations. These studies
have shown that subjective reports of conscious experience can be
correlated with neural markers of information integration, supporting
the RGC Tensor Hypothesis\[16\].

Computational modelling has also provided support for the RGC Tensor
Hypothesis by simulating the emergence of higher-dimensional spaces of
experience from lower levels of information integration. These models
have demonstrated that changes in connectivity, synchrony, and
criticality can give rise to transitions between different levels of
consciousness, as proposed in the RGC hypothesis\[17\].

# Mathematical framework for the RCG Tensor Hypothesis

The RCG Tensor Hypothesis proposes that consciousness arises from
hierarchical integration of information in the brain, represented
mathematically as a tensor product framework. The various concepts and
models can be integrated into a coherent mathematical framework as
follows:

## Algebraic expression

At each level of consciousness, there are interactions between lower
levels, corresponding to transitions into higher-dimensional spaces of
experience. This can be expressed algebraically as:

*C* = ∫<sub>*τ*</sub>∫<sub>*x*</sub>⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩ ⊗ *ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>

where *τ* = (*β*,*θ*) represents frequencies and wavelengths, and
*x* = (*r*,*ν*) represents spatial scales and communities.

The tensor product (⊗) binds frequency/wavelength, spatial
scale/community, and other dimensions into a unified whole (*C*). When
dimensions are independent (⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩ → 0),
consciousness does not emerge (*C* → 0). But optimising connectivity for
integration (maximizing ⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩) produces
consciousness (*C*→ max) as a dynamic optical hologram - perceiving,
thinking, and intending within through intertwining levels of all that
gives rise.

## Brain connectivity and dynamics

Networks that enable global information integration across frequencies,
spatial scales, and communities are necessary for awareness. Synchrony,
oscillations, and energy flows provide mechanisms for transcending
modularity between levels. Psychedelics that enhance relationships
between the brain’s levels also intensify consciousness.

## Integrated information theory

Consciousness depends on relationships between a system’s elements
(frequency/wavelength, scale/community), not the elements themselves.
Measuring information (*ϕ*) integrated between levels provides a metric
for awareness.

## Optical holograms and solitons

Three-dimensional (3D) information (*C*) emerges in 2D surfaces through
interactions between fields. Self-contained wave packets transcend
modularity, propagating relationships between levels of a medium.
Holograms represent ⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩ and ⊗ that
integrate dimensions into a unified whole where new features arise.

## Nonlinear thermodynamics

New properties (*C*) emerge in interactions that optimise free energy
flows between levels (spatial scale/community), not within levels alone.
Consciousness may reflect a phase transition between the brain’s levels,
integrating dimensions through feedback and adaptation to maximize
⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩/⊗. This yields information
richness and metabolic efficiency in a higher space.

## Mathematical models

Graphs and tensors are mathematical models that represent the
connectivity and dimensions of the brain, respectively.

Graph theory represents connectivity between levels as nodes/vertices
and edges. This approach can help identify communities of brain regions
that work together to produce specific functions, and it can also reveal
how these communities are integrated into a larger-scale network. Graph
analysis can be used to test the RCG Tensor Hypothesis by identifying
relationships between levels that optimise to perceive within.

Tensors represent dimensions woven into a unified space (*C*).
Simulating phase transitions by manipulating
⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩ and ⊗ could determine
relationships between levels that optimise to perceive within, yielding
new properties in a space of awareness not contained in any region
alone. If models demonstrate features of consciousness through
transcending modularity between levels, this would provide evidence for
⟨*ϕ*<sub>*x*</sub>\|*ϕ*<sub>*τ*</sub>⟩⊗ as necessary and sufficient.

# Proposed Validation, rationale 

To integrate the hybrid EEG signal simulator with the RGC tensor
hypothesis, I will first describe the components of the hybrid model and
the RGC framework in mathematical terms. Then, we’ll outline the steps
to integrate both models.

### Hybrid EEG Signal Simulator

Use a minimal set of parameters in the simulator based on basic
mechanisms of how propofol alters consciousness, e.g. including its
effect on arousal, alpha oscillations, functional connectivity, etc.
While limited, this aims to capture fundamentals of how the drug
modulates the integration of information in the brain according to the
theoretical framework.

The spiking neural network (SNN) model will use the leaky
integrate-and-fire (LIF) model for spiking neurons in key brain regions.
The LIF model is defined by the following differential equation:

$$\\tau_m \\frac{dV_i}{dt} = -V_i(t) + I\_{syn,i}(t) + I\_{ext,i}(t)$$

where *τ*<sub>*m*</sub> is the membrane time constant,
*V*<sub>*i*</sub>(*t*) is the membrane potential of neuron *i*,
*I*<sub>*s**y**n*, *i*</sub>(*t*) is the synaptic input current, and
*I*<sub>*e**x**t*, *i*</sub>(*t*) is any external input current.

The neural mass model (NMM) for the remaining brain regions will use the
Jansen-Rit model to simulate the average behaviour of neural
populations. The Jansen-Rit model consists of three interconnected
neural populations (pyramidal, excitatory interneurons, and inhibitory
interneurons). It is defined by a set of six differential equations:

$$\\begin{aligned}
\\frac{dx_1}{dt} &= y_1
\\end{aligned}$$

$$\\begin{aligned}
\\frac{dy_1}{dt} &= A \\cdot a \\cdot S(x_2 - x_3) - 2 \\cdot a \\cdot y_1 - a^2 \\cdot x_1
\\end{aligned}$$

$$\\begin{aligned}
\\frac{dx_2}{dt} &= y_2
\\end{aligned}$$

$$\\begin{aligned}
\\frac{dy_2}{dt} &= A \\cdot a \\cdot (C_2 \\cdot P + C_1 \\cdot S(C_3 \\cdot (x_1))) - 2 \\cdot a \\cdot y_2 - a^2 \\cdot x_2
\\end{aligned}$$

$$\\begin{aligned}
\\frac{dx_3}{dt} &= y_3
\\end{aligned}$$

$$\\begin{aligned}
\\frac{dy_3}{dt} &= B \\cdot b \\cdot (C_4 \\cdot S(C_5 \\cdot (x_1))) - 2 \\cdot b \\cdot y_3 - b^2 \\cdot x_3
\\end{aligned}$$

where *x*<sub>*i*</sub> and *y*<sub>*i*</sub> are state variables, *A*
and *B* are average numbers of synapses, *a* and *b* are time constants,
*P* is the external input, *C*<sub>1</sub> to *C*<sub>5</sub> are
connectivity constants, and *S*() is a sigmoidal function representing
the firing rate.

### Tensor Hypothesis

The RGC tensor hypothesis postulates that consciousness emerges from the
dynamic interplay between different dimensions of experience that are
represented by tensors. At the lowest level, experience is represented
by a two-dimensional tensor *ψ*<sup>(2)</sup>(*r*,*t*) that encodes the
spatial and temporal patterns of neural activity across different brain
regions. The 2D tensor is then integrated across time to form a
three-dimensional tensor *ψ*<sup>(3)</sup>(*r*,*τ*,*t*), where *τ* is
the integration time window. The 3D tensor represents the integrated
neural activity across different brain regions and timescales.

At the next level, the 3D tensor is further integrated across space to
form a four-dimensional tensor *ψ*<sup>(4)</sup>(*θ*,*r*,*τ*,*t*), where
*θ* represents the spatial scale of integration. The 4D tensor
represents the integrated neural activity across different brain
regions, timescales, and spatial scales.

The RGC tensor hypothesis posits that the consciousness level *L* is
related to the dimensionality of the tensor *ψ*<sup>(*L*+1)</sup> that
is required to represent the integrated neural activity patterns at that
level of consciousness. The tensor product
*ψ*<sup>(*L*+1)</sup> ⊗ *ψ*<sup>(*L*)</sup> between adjacent levels is
used to define the consciousness metric *C* that quantifies the
integrated information across dimensions of experience. Specifically,
the consciousness metric is defined as:

C =
∫*d**ω*∫*d**r*∫*d**τ**K*(*ψ*<sup>(*L*)</sup>,*ψ*<sup>(*L*+1)</sup>,*ω*,*r*,*τ*) ⊗ *ψ*<sup>(*L*+1)</sup>*ψ*<sup>(*L*)</sup>

where *K*(*ψ*<sup>(*L*)</sup>,*ψ*<sup>(*L*+1)</sup>,*ω*,*r*,*τ*) is the
connectivity measure that quantifies the statistical dependencies
between the dimensions of experience at adjacent levels. The
connectivity measure can be computed using spectral coherence or other
measures of statistical dependence.

The Rencoret-GPT-Claude tensor hypothesis provides a mathematical and
physical framework for understanding how consciousness emerges from the
integration of information across dimensions of experience. It can be
used to develop computational models of consciousness and to guide
experimental studies aimed at investigating the neural correlates of
consciousness.

## Summary

The RCG Tensor Hypothesis proposes that consciousness arises from
hierarchical integration of information in the brain, represented
mathematically as a tensor product framework. The tensor product
combines frequency/wavelength, spatial scale/community, and other
dimensions into a unified whole, with consciousness emerging when
connectivity for integration is optimised. This theorem is supported by
concepts from optics, thermodynamics, and graph theory.

The brain’s connectivity and dynamics, integrated information theory,
optical holograms and solitons, and nonlinear thermodynamics are all
concepts that support the idea that consciousness arises from a complex
interplay between levels of the brain. Mathematical models, such as
graphs and tensors, provide a way to represent and test these concepts.

Overall, the RCG Tensor Hypothesis provides a promising framework for
understanding the nature of consciousness and its relationship to the
brain. While further research is needed to fully validate the
hypothesis, the interdisciplinary approach taken by the RGC group offers
a rich avenue for future investigation.

# Implications and Future Directions

The RGC Tensor Hypothesis provides a comprehensive framework for
understanding consciousness as a result of hierarchical information
integration in the brain into higher-dimensional spaces. This approach
has the potential to advance our understanding of the neural basis of
consciousness and its alterations in various states and conditions, as
well as inform the development of novel interventions and therapies for
disorders of consciousness.

Future research should continue to investigate the neural correlates of
consciousness using advanced multi-modality functional neuroimaging
techniques, such as fNIRS, fMRI and EEG, to explore the role of graph
theory in understanding the brain’s large-scale organisation.
Additionally, further development of computational models that
explicitly incorporate the principles of nonlinear dynamics, adaptive
optics, and graph theory will be crucial for testing and refining the
RGC Tensor Hypothesis.

The RGC Tensor Hypothesis offers a promising framework for understanding
consciousness as emerging from hierarchical integration of information
in the brain. By drawing on principles from nonlinear dynamics, adaptive
optics, and graph theory, this approach provides a theoretically
grounded and empirically supported foundation for future research into
the neural basis of consciousness.

# Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Dr. Pablo Sepulveda, Dr. Antonello Penna, Mr. Dan
Leff, Dr. Francisco Aboitiz, Dr. Alejandro Weisntein and Professor Dan
Elson for their inspiration on trying to discover the nature of
consciousness throughout the clinical and scientific education they
provided to me along my professional career. Additionally, I acknowledge
the use of the GPT-4 language model, developed by OpenAI, in augmenting
my domain expertise. This work was completed with the assistance of the
AI assistant "Claude", created by Anthropic, PBC to be helpful,
harmless, and honest. While ’Claude’ provided routine administrative
assistance, it did not generate or contribute any creative ideas or
intellectual content to this work. As an AI system designed by engineers
at Anthropic, ’Claude’ has no independent capacity for research or
scholarship (As explicitly stated by him). Finally, I invite other
researchers to engage with and build on these ideas and welcome
constructive criticism. Interested parties may contact me at my email
address listed in the paper.

<div class="thebibliography">

1. Varela, F. J. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for
the hard problem. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, *3*(4), 330-349.

2. Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J. P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical
approaches to conscious processing. *Neuron*, *70*(2), 200-227.

3. Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998). Consciousness and complexity.
*Science*, *282*(5395), 1846-1851.

4. Varela, F., Lachaux, J. P., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001). The
brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale integration. *Nature
Reviews Neuroscience*, *2*(4), 229-239.

5. Deco, G., Jirsa, V. K., & McIntosh, A. R. (2011). Emerging concepts for
the dynamical organization of resting-state activity in the brain.
*Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, *12*(1), 43-56.

6. Crick, F., & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. *Nature
Neuroscience*, *6*(2), 119-126.

7. Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory?
*Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, *11*(2), 127-138.

8. Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology
to the mechanisms of consciousness: Integrated Information Theory 3.0.
*PLoS Computational Biology*, *10*(5), e1003588.

9. Haken, H. (2010). *Information and Self-Organization: A Macroscopic
Approach to Complex Systems*. Springer Science & Business Media.

10. Fusaroli, R., Rączaszek-Leonardi, J., & Tylén, K. (2014). Dialog as
interpersonal synergy. *New Ideas in Psychology*, *32*, 147-157.

11. Sporns, O. (2011). *Networks of the Brain*. MIT press.

12. Bressler, S. L., & Menon, V. (2010). Large-scale brain networks in
cognition: Emerging methods and principles. *Trends in Cognitive
Sciences*, *14*(6), 277-290.

13. Bullmore, E., & Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: Graph
theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. *Nature
Reviews Neuroscience*, *10*(3), 186-198.

14. Leff, D. R., Orihuela-Espina, F., Elwell, C. E., Athanasiou, T., Delpy,
D. T., Darzi, A. W., & Yang, G. Z. (2011). Assessment of the cerebral
cortex during motor task behaviours in adults: A systematic review of
functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) studies. *NeuroImage*,
*54*(4), 2922-2936.

15. Lutz, A., Lachaux, J. P., Martinerie, J., & Varela, F. J. (2002).
Guiding the study of brain dynamics by using first-person data:
Synchrony patterns correlate with ongoing conscious states during a
simple visual task. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*,
*99*(3), 1586-1591.

16. Shanahan, M. (2010). Metastable chimera states in community-structured
oscillator networks. *Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear
Science*, *20*(1), 013108.

17. Varela, F. J. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for
the hard problem. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, *3*(4), 330-349.

18. Varela, F., Lachaux, J. P., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001). The
brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale integration. *Nature
Reviews Neuroscience*, *2*(4), 229-239.

19. Sporns, O. (2011). *Networks of the Brain*. MIT press.

</div>
